The default implementation is great to get things moving,
but you will eventually need to customize it to your
application's unique security requirements as you might just
want form authentication and not basic.
Not all your web pages will require authentication.
Some could be accessed anonymously, such as the login or the landing page.
And you will probably want to get rid of that bland default
login page with a fancy one of your own.
Now Spring Security provides an adapter, the WebSecurityConfigurationAdapter.
If you extend this class, you get access to a number of builders,
such as the HttpSecurity and
AuthenticationManagerBuilder via a number of configure methods,
which you can override.
Now if you recall, by default,
the SpringBootWebSecurityConfiguration class created one for us as it did not
detect one in the Spring application context defined by us.
If we drill into it, you can see its default configuration.
For any request, HTTP authentication is required,
and both form and basic are supported.
Now let's create our own implementation that extends
the WebSecurityConfigurationAdapter, and we add the configuration annotation.
So now the ConditionalOn MissingBean will be triggered in the
SpringBootWebSecurityConfiguration class and will prevent Spring
Boot from configuring the default one for us.
We override the configure method that gives us
access to the HTTP builder object.
We can manipulate this object and build our own desired HTTP
authentication and authorization strategies.
Let's set it up the same way as a default implementation so
that all requests require authentication,
but with only basic authentication supported.
Now if we drill into the filter chain,
you can see we only have the basic authentication filter,
and we no longer get the form login page as Spring Security
returned a 401 with the WWW‑Authenticate header.
Basically, this header tells the browser that basic authentication is required,
and the browser, by default, prompted the user for their credentials.
Now if we enter them,
it sends the basic header to Spring Security to be
intercepted by the basic authentication filter.
As you can see, with the HTTP builder,
you're essentially manipulating the filter chain and its filters. Next, let's look at configuring our own login page.